blog: Add "Godot Editor (Beta) arrives to the Play Store" (#551)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_article/android_godot_editor_play_store_beta_release.md

---

> title: "Godot Editor Play Store (Beta) Release"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Godot Editor (Beta) arrives to the Play Store"
```

> excerpt: "Announcement of the Play Store beta release of the Godot Android Editor."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: "Godot Engine arrives to the Google Play Store with an official beta release of the Godot Editor for Android! With the UI adjusted to work better on a tiny screen, you can try your hand at making games on the go."
```

> categories: ["news"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
categories: ["pre-release"]
```

author: Fredia Huya-Kouadio
image: /storage/blog/covers/android-godot-editor-play-store-beta-release-cover.png
date: 2023-02-03 15:00:00
---

### TLDR;

The Android port of the Godot Editor is now available on the Google Play Store for Beta Testing!

* [Godot 3.6 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v3)

> * [Godot 4.0 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v4)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The follow-up paragraph serves as a good intro (after some adjustments), we don't need this part.

### Godot Android Editor

1. **The Godot Editor is built with the Godot engine**
1. The Godot engine supports the Android platform

Therefore, it is possible to port and run the Godot Editor on Android devices for development of Godot games and applications.

*Note that the same tenets apply to other platforms supported by the Godot engine like iOS; the implementation is left as an exercise to the reader :).*

Since [our announcement last year](https://godotengine.org/article/dev-snapshot-godot-3-5-beta-3/), we have been hard at work demonstrating this capability and have been making significant progress developing, refining and polishing the port of the Godot Editor on Android devices.

This culminates with the **beta release** of the Godot Android Editor on the Google Play Store!

* [Godot 3.6 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v3)

> * [Godot 4.0 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v4)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've probably heard it before, that Godot's own editor is "built with the Godot Engine", and in a certain way it is true. Another fact is that Godot supports the Android platform, and many developers have been using it to create [amazing mobile games](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xF3QiQfQxeQ) in the last few years. The natural conclusion of these two factoids is a question: "But can I run the Godot Editor on my Android device to make games and app on the go?".

Yes, you can! Since [our announcement last year](/article/dev-snapshot-godot-3-5-beta-3/), we have been hard at work demonstrating this capability and have been making significant progress developing, refining, and polishing the port of the Godot Editor on Android devices.

*Note that the same tenets apply to other platforms supported by the Godot Engine, like iOS; the implementation is left as an exercise to the reader :).*

Our porting efforts culminate with a **beta release** of the Godot Editor for Android on the Google Play Store! And you can try not one, but two upcoming Godot Engine releases on your device:

* [Godot 3.6 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v3)
* [Godot 4.0 Play Store beta release](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.godotengine.editor.v4)
```

> ### Highlights / Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Features & Highlights
```

The focus at this stage has been to replicate as much of the functionality offered by the Godot Editor on Desktop platforms to the Android platform in order to provide Godot users with an experience, environment and capabilities they are already familiar with.

> With this release, we hope to enable existing and new Godot users, as well as Android users interested in game development, with the ability and flexibility to perform development and testing on more accessible and portable Android devices!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The focus, at this stage, has been to replicate on the Android platform as much of the functionality offered by the Godot Editor on desktop platforms as we can. We want to provide Godot users with an experience, environment, and capabilities they are already familiar with.

With this release we hope to enable both existing and new members of the Godot community, as well as other Android users interested in game development, to develop and test their projects on accessible, flexible, and portable mobile devices. To that end, we've tried to optimize the workflow and the user interface to work better on smaller screens and with touch input.
```

#### Supported Form Factor

For the best experience, we **recommend the use of a large form factor Android device** (i.e: Android tablet or larger).

> The Godot Android Editor can also be downloaded and installed on regular Android phones, though the experience may vary and be suboptimal. We'll be looking for user feedback to address key pain points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Supported form factors

For the best experience, we **strongly recommend** to use a large form factor Android device (e.g., an Android tablet or an Android-powered netbook). The Godot Editor for Android can also be downloaded and installed on regular Android phones, though the experience may vary and be suboptimal. We are looking forward to your feedback to address key pain points in future releases.
```

#### Keyboard & Mouse Support

> For the best experience, we recommend the use of an external keyboard and mouse connected to the Android device. This mirrors the development experience on Desktop platforms, which has received numerous refinement and polish over the years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Keyboard and mouse support

While we have made some adjustments to allow for easier navigation and control with the touch input, an external keyboard and mouse connected to the Android device would still give you a better experience. This setup brings you close the development experience on desktop platforms, which has received numerous refinement and polish over the years.
```

#### TouchScreen & MultiTouch Support

> While keyboard and mouse provide the optimal experience, the Godot Android Editor has been updated with touchscreen and multitouch support to allow using it without a connected keyboard or mouse. Here are the supported gestures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Touchscreen and multi-touch support

The Godot Editor for Android has been updated with touchscreen and multi-touch support to allow using it without a connected keyboard or mouse. This support is going to receive refinement and additional features based on your feedback.
```

##### Single tap

![single_tap_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/single_tap_record.gif)

##### Single tap & drag

![single_tap_drag_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/single_tap_drag_record.gif)

##### Double tap & zoom

![double_tap_zoom_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/double_tap_zoom_record.gif)

##### Two fingers pan

![two_fingers_pan_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/two_fingers_pan_record.gif)

##### Two fingers zoom

![two_fingers_zoom_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/two_finger_zoom_record.gif)

##### Long press to right-click

![long_press_right_click_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/long_press_right_click_record.gif)

##### Improved navigation controls

Two joystick-like controls have been added to the spatial editor to allow navigation through a 3D project without a connected keyboard or mouse.

> ![navigation_controls_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/navigation_controls_record.gif)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Viewport navigation

* **Single tap.** Tap once on an object in the viewport to select it for editing.

![single_tap_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/single_tap_record.gif)

* **Single tap & drag.** Tap once and drag over the viewport to select multiple objects with a rectangular selection.

![single_tap_drag_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/single_tap_drag_record.gif)

* **Double-tap & zoom.** Double-tap and drag to zoom in or out inside of the viewport.

![double_tap_zoom_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/double_tap_zoom_record.gif)

* **Two fingers rotate & zoom.** Use two fingers to rotate and zoom the camera of the viewport.

![two_fingers_pan_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/two_fingers_pan_record.gif)

![two_fingers_zoom_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/two_finger_zoom_record.gif)

* **Virtual joysticks.** Two joystick-like controls have been added to the spatial editor to allow fly-mode navigation in 3D scenes.

![navigation_controls_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/navigation_controls_record.gif)

#### Editor navigation

* **Long press to right-click.** Tap and hold on a UI element to activate its context menu.

![long_press_right_click_record.gif](/storage/app/media/android/long_press_right_click_record.gif)
```

#### GDScript Scripting & Debugging Support

![godot_gdscript_editing_recording.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_gdscript_editing_recording.gif)

Due to its integrated nature, the full capabilities of the GDScript text editor are available in the Godot Android Editor including support for auto indentation, syntax highlighting, code completion, and documentation.

The GDScript debugger, with the ability to set breakpoints and program stepping is fully available as well.

![godot_gdscript_debugging_recording.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_gdscript_debugging_recording.gif)

> _**Note**: The debugger functionality is only available on large form factor Android devices due to the need to have the running project [side-by-side](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/large-screens/multi-window-support) with the Godot Editor._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Code editor support for GDScript

Due to its integrated nature, the full capabilities of the GDScript text editor are available in the Godot Editor for Android. This includes support for auto indentation, syntax highlighting, code completion, and documentation. You can even access familiar power features, like drag'n'drop support for node paths from the Scene dock.

![godot_gdscript_editing_recording.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_gdscript_editing_recording.gif)

### Live debugging

An essential part of the editor is running scenes or the entire project in the debug mode. When you run the instance of your project, it opens in a split-screen view, allowing you to interact with it while retaining full control over the Godot Editor. For example, you can add breakpoints, step-through, and hot-reload your GDScript scripts, just like you can do it on the desktop.

![godot_gdscript_debugging_recording.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_gdscript_debugging_recording.gif)

_**Note**: The debugger functionality is only available on large form factor Android devices with multi-window support, due to the need to have the running project [side-by-side](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/large-screens/multi-window-support) with the Godot Editor._
```

#### Import Existing Projects

The Godot Android Editor supports the ability to import, open and edit existing Godot projects.
For example, a user can start a Godot project on their desktop machine, transfer it to their Android tablet (via file sync, version control, etc) and continue working on the project on their Android tablet while on the go.

Note that while all Godot supported renderers are available, for performance reasons we recommend using the following renderer for projects edited / ran on the Android device:

* Godot 3.x: [**OpenGL ES 2.0**](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/rendering/gles2_gles3_differences.html)

> * Godot 4.x: [**Compatibility**](https://godotengine.org/article/status-of-opengl-renderer/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Import and edit existing projects

The Godot Editor for Android supports the ability to import, open, and edit existing Godot projects.
For example, a user can start a Godot project on their desktop machine, transfer it to their Android tablet (via file sync, version control, or other means), and continue working on the project while on the go.

Do note, that while all renderers provided by Godot are available, for performance reasons we recommend using the [OpenGL ES 2.0](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/rendering/gles2_gles3_differences.html) renderer with Godot 3.x and the [Compatibility](https://godotengine.org/article/status-of-opengl-renderer/) renderer with Godot 4.0 if you intend to run or edit your project on an Android device.
```

> #### Exporting Godot Projects
> 
> The Godot Android Editor provides the ability to export a Godot project as a [PCK or ZIP file archive](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/export/exporting_projects.html#pck-versus-zip-pack-file-formats), allowing a single exported main pack file to be used with multiple Godot executables generated on Desktop platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Exporting Godot projects

The Godot Editor for Android includes the ability to export your Godot project. You can [choose between](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/export/exporting_projects.html#pck-versus-zip-pack-file-formats) a PCK file or a ZIP archive file, either of which can be used with export templates provided by desktop platforms.
```

> ### Next Steps
> 
> The Android version still has several limitations, usability issues and missing capabilities. Below are listed some of the high priority issues we’re continuing to work on to improve the state of the Godot Android Editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next for Godot on Android?

The Android version is still in development and has various limitations, usability issues, and missing capabilities. There are several areas we consider high priority and which we aim to significantly improve in the upcoming releases.
```

> #### Godot 4.0 Performance
> 
> Due to Godot 4’s ‘[in development](https://godotengine.org/article/release-management-4-0-and-beyond/)’ status, the version of the Godot Android Editor for Godot 4 still has performance and stability issues. This is an area we’re planning to take a closer look at as Godot 4 gets closer to primetime ready status.
> 
> For users interested / willing to troubleshoot the bleeding edge, we provide the ability to install both versions of the editor side by side on the same Android device.
> ***Do note that Godot 4 projects are not backward compatible with Godot 3.***

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Godot 4.0 performance

As Godot 4 is still [in development](/article/release-management-4-0-and-beyond/) and will take several releases to get to the point of optimal performance and stability, the 4.0 version of the Godot Editor for Android is also less stable and performant, compared to its 3.x counterpart. This is an area we’re planning to take a closer look at as Godot 4 gets closer to the prime time ready status.

For users interested in testing and willing to troubleshoot the bleeding edge, we provide the ability to install both versions of the editor side by side on the same Android device. **Do note that Godot 4 projects are not backward compatible with Godot 3.**
```

> #### Generating Android APK Binaries
> 
> At this stage, the Godot Android Editor lacks the capability to build and export an Android apk binary. Instead it falls back to providing the ability to generate and export a [Godot PCK or ZIP file](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/export/exporting_projects.html#pck-versus-zip-pack-file-formats).
> 
> We are investigating ways to provide this capability, with an eye toward providing the fast build and deployment time that’s available on Desktop platforms. In order to properly prioritize this task, we’d appreciate feedback from the community on the importance and need for this capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generating Android APK binaries

At this stage, the Godot Editor for Android lacks the capability to build and export an Android APK binary. Instead, it falls back to providing the ability to generate and export a [Godot PCK or ZIP file](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/export/exporting_projects.html#pck-versus-zip-pack-file-formats).

We are investigating ways to provide this feature, with an eye toward providing the fast build and deployment times available on desktop platforms. Please let us know if this is a capability that you are looking for from the Android version of the editor, so we can properly prioritize this task.
```

> #### Improving Mobile UX
> 
> As mentioned, the current UX replicates the user experience on Desktop platforms with some affordances added to improve the touchscreen experience. Based on user feedback, we plan to continue iterating on the UX to better support touchscreen devices, and bring the development experience up to parity with the one on desktop, without the need for a connected keyboard and mouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Improving mobile UX

As mentioned above, the current UX closely replicates the user experience of desktop platforms with some adjustments made on top to improve the usability on touchscreen devices. We plan to continue iterating on the user experience of game development on Android, and want to provide you a natural touch-driven experience without the need to use a mouse and keyboard combination. We want to achieve that without sacrificing any functionality that you might expect from the Godot Editor, and without steering far away from the level of desktop development experience.
```

> ### Laying the Foundations for the Godot XR Editor
> 
> 1. **The Godot Editor is built with the Godot engine**
> 1. The Godot engine supports XR devices thanks to the great work of [Bastiaan Olij](https://github.com/BastiaanOlij), the Godot XR Lead maintainer
> 1. The majority of standalone XR devices are based off the Android platform
> 
> As such, the work done to enable and support the Godot Editor on the Android platform lays the foundations for building and enabling the Godot XR Editor on standalone XR devices like the Meta Quest.
> 
> Development for this effort is currently happening on github and we have been making solid progress toward enabling and running the Godot XR Editor on the Meta Quest and on PCVR devices.
> 
> ![godot_xr_editor_preview.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_xr_editor_preview.gif)
> 
> Through this work, we envision providing XR enthusiasts / developers / users the ability and the tools to perform development of games and applications directly in XR, thus allowing them to leverage the unique strengths of the medium.
> 
> If you’re interested in the project (e.g: testing, contributing), please take a look at https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67736

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Laying the foundation for the Godot XR Editor

The effort of porting the Godot Editor to Android brings more benefits than editing your projects on phones and tablets. Many XR devices run Android OS, and thanks to the great work of [Bastiaan Olij](https://github.com/BastiaanOlij) and XR contributors Godot comes with native support for standalone XR devices, such as Meta Quest. This means that in future you will be able to run the Godot Editor on your XR device, editing and debugging games and applications directly in the virtual reality and leveraging unique strengths of the medium.

![godot_xr_editor_preview.gif](/storage/app/media/android/godot_xr_editor_preview.gif)

Development of this feature is currently happening on GitHub, and we have been making solid progress toward enabling and running the Godot XR Editor on the Meta Quest and on PCVR devices. If you're interested in helping out with testing or even contributing to the XR editor, please at a look at [this pull-request](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67736).

## Your feedback

As mentioned multiple times throughout the article, we are very much looking forward to your feedback on the Android editor. It's a new territory and a great opportunity to bring more people to the Godot community, people with unique set of tools and limitations. As always, we couldn't make Godot better without your help, so if you are planning to test this beta release, consider leaving a [bug report on GitHub](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/issues) or joining the [Godot Contributors Chat](https://chat.godotengine.org/) to talk to the project maintainers directly about your experience.
```
